Hello and welcome back
to the course on deep learning.
In today's tutorial we're going to talk
about the restricted Boltzmann machine
and we're going to see how it learns,
and how it is applied in practice.
Gonna be a very interesting tutorial, let's get started.
So here we've got the standard Boltzmann machine
or the full Boltzmann machine where as you remember,
we've got all of these intra connections.
Every single node connects to every single other node
and while in theory this is a great model
and it's probably you can solve lots of different problems,
in practice it's very hard to implement in fact,
at some point we'll run into a roadblock because we cannot,
simply cannot compute a full Boltzmann machine
and the reason for that is as you increase number of nodes,
the number of connections between them grows exponentially.
So therefore, a different type of architecture was proposed
which is called the restricted Boltzmann machine
and this is what it looks like.
So here we've got exactly the same concept
with the simple restriction that hidden nodes cannot connect
to each other and visible nodes cannot connect
to each other.
Other than that, everything's the same.
We've got connections which are undirected meaning
that they happen in both ways both from visible nodes
to hidden nodes and from hidden nodes to visible nodes.
And that's the architecture
of the restricted Boltzmann machine.
And now we're going to talk about how it is,
how it works, how it's trained and then how it's applied
in practice.
So let's get straight into it.
We're going to look at an example with movies
because you can use a restricted Boltzmann machine
to build a recommender system and that's exactly
what you're going to be doing
in the practical tutorials we've had learned.
And this is going to help us build
an intuitive understanding
of the restricted Boltzmann machine and also it's going
to help you when you're walking
through the practical tutorials.
So let's say our restricted Boltzmann machine is going
or our recommender system is going
to be working on six movies.
Of course, in reality, there's going to be lots
and lots more movies as you'll see
in the practical tutorials.
There'll be many more movies but in our example,
we're just going to work with six for simplicity's sake
and the way it's going to work is that we're going to,
well let's rewind a little bit.
As you remember, a Boltzmann machine is a generative type
of model so it always constantly generates
or is capable of generating these states,
these different states of our system
and then in training through feeding it training data
and through a process called contrastive divergence
which we'll discuss further down in this section.
We help the Boltzmann machine
to become very,
become a representation
of our specific system rather being a recommender system
for any kind of possible impossible movies or any kind
of recommender possible impossible recommender system.
We make it become more and more like the recommender system
that is associated with our specific set of movies
that we are feeding into this system
and with our specific training data.
And so through that process,
what this restricted Boltzmann machine is going
to learn is it's going to understand how
to allocate its hidden nodes to certain features.
And this process is very very similar
to what we discussed in the convolutionary neural networks.
So for example, through the training process,
the restricted Boltzmann machine might identify
that genres are, genres of movies are important features
for instance, genre A, B, C, D and E and the important thing
to understand here is that it doesn't know
that these are genres,
it's just identifying certain features.
We'll talk about this just in a second.
Let's just, to start off with,
to get us more comfortable with this concept,
well let's kind of make it obvious that it doesn't have
to be genres, for example, it could identify
that genre A and B are important for the recommender system
but then other important features include an actor,
maybe Kevin Costner, an award maybe an Oscar,
a director, Robert Zemeckis.
So, it will identify that these are important features
and so what does that mean?
Right?
You're probably, right now the main question
that you might have in your head right now is, what,
what does that even mean when it's identified
that a feature is important?
Well let's go through this, during the training process,
we're feeding in lots and lots of rows
to the restricted Boltzmann machine and for example,
these rows could look something like this
where we've got movies as columns
and then the users as rows.
And here we've got the ratings or the feedback
that each user has left for the movie
whether they liked it, that's a one
or they didn't like it, a zero
and also the empty cells are totally fine as well
because that just means that person hasn't watched
that movie.
And, through this process as we're feeding
in this data to this restricted Boltzmann machine
what it is able to do is it's able
to understand better our system and it is better
to adjust itself to be a better representation
of our system, and understand and reflect better reflect all
of the intra connectivity that is,
that might be present here because ultimately,
people have biases, people have preferences,
people have tastes and that is what is reflected
in the datas.
If somebody liked Movie two and three
and didn't like Movie one just means
that that's what's their preferences.
Somebody else might have liked movie you one
and might have not liked Movie two
and might have liked that Movie three.
So basically the data is talking about the preferences
of people, their tastes and their, how they prefer
to view movies or how they're biased
towards different movies and that's what
the restricted Boltzmann machine is trying to explain.
And for instance it can or not explaining,
that's what it's trying to model.
And for instance, it could pick up from our example here
that Movies three, four and six have very,
usually have similar ratings.
Not all the time but very often when somebody likes
Movie three, four, they will probably like Movie six
or when somebody likes Movie six and four
or six and three, they'll probably like Movie four.
Six and three, they'll like Movie four
or if they don't like Movie three and four,
they're unlikely to like Movie six.
It's not always, so here we've got an example
of somebody didn't like Movie three, didn't like Movie four,
they can be examples where it doesn't follow that rule
but it's those are going to be kind of more
of an exception from the rule rather than a common.
And this is just a very simplified example.
But then what the restricted Boltzmann machine would do,
it would identify this in the training
and it would assign a node to look out for that feature.
And even without knowing what that feature is
because as you can see all the input it's getting are ones
and zeros, it's not getting the genre of the movies,
it's not getting the list of actors,
it's not getting the awards that the movie won, won.
It's only getting just these ones and zeros.
But even from these similarities, it can establish
that there probably is some feature
that these movies have in common
that is making people like them.
So people who like these movies like that,
not just they like that movie, they like that feature
and therefore any other movie with that feature, will,
is more, is highly likely to be enjoyed by those people
and in our understanding,
as humans that feature might be genre.
And this is again, this is very similar to what we had
with convolutional neural networks.
We might not have a descriptive term for that feature
but just for simplicity's sake we're gonna say
that it's Genre A or it could be Actor X
and that way it'll be easier for us
and to understand what's going on.
But that's in essence what the restricted Boltzmann machine
is doing through this input it is,
and through the training process it is better
and better understanding what's features these movies
might have in common or if they are features
that these movies might have in common
and it's assigning its hidden nodes
or the weights are being assigned in such a way
that the hidden nodes are becoming reflective
of those specific features.
So that's how the training of the RBM happens.
Now let's have a look at something more fun.
Let's have a look at how this would play out in action.
So now that we've trained up our machine,
our restricted Boltzmann machine.
We know that it is able to pick out these certain features
and based on what it's previously seen about thousands
of our users and their ratings and now we're going
to look at specific features so let's say
we're, it's picked out drama as a feature,
action DiCaprio, Leonardo DiCaprio as the actor
in a movie, Oscar, whether or not the movie has won an Oscar
and Quentin Tarantino, whether or not he was a director
of the movie.
And again these are just for our benefit.
In reality, the restricted Boltzmann machine has no idea
whether (laughs) the director's name is Tarantino or not.
It's just picking out a feature.
This is our explanation of that feature
for intuitive purposes and now we're going to look
at a couple of movies.
So the machine is trained up on lots and lots of rows
and now we're going to input a new row
into this restricted Boltzmann machine
into this recommender system and we're going
to see how it's going to go
about giving us the prediction whether
or not a person will like certain movies.
This is the fun part.
This is the actual application of the RBM.
So let's start.
We've got movies The Matrix, the Fight Club, Forrest Gump,
Pulp Fiction, Titanic and The Departed.
And I tried to pick movies which are quite commonly seen,
so hopefully you've seen all of these or at least most
of these movies, if not it doesn't really matter,
it will still go through there.
You'll still be able to follow along
with the examples totally fine.
The Oscar here represents whether
or not a movie won an Oscar just so that we,
there's no questions about that.
And the Oscar here we're talking
about is the Best Picture Oscar.
So an Oscar is an Academy Award and there's lots
of different Academy Awards, for instance, they can,
that is pretty much synonymous terms is done with lots
of different types of Oscars.
You could get an Oscar for being the best actor,
you could get an Oscar for the best sound effects
in your movie or the best visual effects.
Well, this specific Oscar we're talking about is
the Best Picture and there's only one of those per year.
Yeah, so these the movies that we're looking at.
And now let's see this person that we're trying
to make a recommendation for, what have they seen,
what they haven't seen, what they've rated
and how they've rated it.
So they've seen The Matrix, they didn't like The matrix,
they put a zero, so one is like, zero is dislike.
Fight Club, they haven't seen the Fight Club.
Forrest Gump, they've seen Forrest Gump
and they like the movie.
Pulp Fiction, they've seen Pulp Fiction
but they didn't like the movie.
Titanic they've seen and they've liked it
and The Departed, they haven't seen that movie
and now we want to make a recommendation
for this person, will they like Fight Club or not?
will they like The Departed or not?
So how does the restricted Boltzmann machine go
about this now.
Now we're finally getting to the to the essence,
we're finally getting to the applications,
so this is gonna be, it's gonna be interesting.
All right, so we're gonna go through this step by step
and we're going to assess which of these nodes are going
to activate for this specific user.
So the Boltzmann machine is trained up,
it already knows about features and similarities.
Now it's going to try to assess which
of these features are going to activate
and think very, it could be useful to think
of it as in the convolutional neural network analogy.
In there, we would feed in a picture
into our convolutional neural network
and it would, certain features would highlight.
Certain features would light up if they're present
in that picture.
Same thing here we're feeding in a row
into our restricted Boltzmann machine
and certain features are going
to light up if they are present in this user's tastes
and preferences and likes and biases.
That's the kind of very intuitive,
what's happening in the background,
that's very intuitive explanation
of what's happening in the background.
So let's go through this, I'm gonna go
with so we're gonna start with Drama.
So in terms of Drama, which movies here are Drama?
We know that Matrix is not Drama, Fight Club is not Drama,
Forrest Gump is Drama.
It's actually, I looked it up, it's actually comedy
and then it's Drama.
We don't have comedy here.
So it's for all in our purposes it's Drama.
Pulp Fiction is not Drama.
Titanic is Drama and The Departed is Drama,
but we don't have data for The Departed, right?
So this Boltzmann machine can only learn from these two.
Right, it can only say, all right so this person liked
Forest Gump and this person liked the Titanic
and based on that this node is gonna light up
and it's going to, we're gonna light it up symbolically
in green meaning that it's activated and it's,
that means this person likes Drama, Drama movies.
Next, Action and you can see that the Action movies we have
here are The Matrix, Fight Club and Pulp Fiction
and Departed.
We have four Action movies but out of them
we only have data for The Matrix and Pulp Fiction
and both of these, this person didn't like.
So it's gonna light up in red.
DiCaprio. So out of all of these movies,
Leonardo DiCaprio is present in Titanic and The Departed
and based on this, just this one,
that one movie the DiCaprio node is going to light up green.
Oscar.
So we've got three Oscar movies.
We only have data for Forrest Gump and Titanic
and based on those, that person liked both.
The node is gonna just light up green.
And finally Tarantino the only movie
with Tarantino as the director here is Pulp Fiction,
out of all of them and that person did not like Tarantino
that movie and therefore this node is gonna light up red.
So there we go, that's the first pass.
Everything from our visible nodes goes into our hidden nodes
and our hidden nodes now we know which ones are activated.
And now, the backward pass happens.
Now what happens is the Boltzmann machine is going to try
to reconstruct our input.
It's going to, I'm gonna show this by flashing them.
So basically that's exactly what happens
in the process whether you're training
and we didn't mention this during a training process, and,
but this is what happens during training as well.
So during training and during this is
and is in essence a test.
What the Boltzmann machine does is it accept values
into the hidden nodes and then it tries
to reconstruct your inputs based
on those hidden nodes if during training
if the reconstruction is incorrect
then everything is adjusted the weights are adjusted
and then we reconstruct again and again again
but now it's a test so we're actually
inputting a certain row and we want to get our predictions.
So basically, there is not gonna be any adjusting
of weights.
We're just going to see how the Boltzmann machine basically
reconstructs these rows.
And moreover, we're not going to care
about the movies that we already have ratings for,
that's what the training part
of the Boltzmann machine is for.
Here we're only going to care
about the movies where we don't have ratings
and we're gonna use the values
that reconstructs as predictions.
So once again from here Boltzmann machine is going
to be reconstructing these input values based
on what it's learned.
And so let's let's go.
How is it going to reconstruct Fight Club?
Well, Fight Club is going to look at all of the nodes
and find out based on what it learned
from the training it's going to really know
which nodes actually connect to Fight Club.
Is it a Drama movie?
No, it's not.
Is it an Action movie?
Yes, it is.
So that's not always going to light up.
Is it, does it have DiCaprio in it?
No, it doesn't.
Did this movie win an Oscar?
It hasn't.
And is Tarantino director of this movie?
No, he's not.
That's in our understanding because we know these things.
In the Boltzmann machine's understanding it will be like,
does this, is this node connected to this node?
No.
Is this node connected to this node?
Yes.
No.
This node to this no.
This to this, no.
So it wouldn't know these words
but it would know these connections,
it would know these associations based
on the weights that it had determined during training
and based on this one connection,
we know this one lit up in red
and therefore Fight Club is going
to be a movie that this person is not going to like.
Then next one.
So now we're going to talk about The Departed.
So the recommendation here is no.
Now let's talk about The Departed.
Again it's gonna go through its nodes,
it's gonna know the connections.
Right?
Just by the weights from which should had established
during training is going to know these connections
and it will know here that The Departed is connected
to this node, is connected to these nodes,
connected to this node, connected this node,
it's not connected to this node.
The weight here is low or very insignificant
and in our terms in human language why is that?
Well because this node is responsible for Drama movies,
it's a Drama movie.
This node is responsible for Action movies,
it's an Action movie.
This node is responsible for DiCaprio movies,
it does have DiCaprio in it.
This movie is now is responsible for Oscar movies,
it does have, it did have an Oscar, did win an Oscar
and therefore based on this,
we can see this node votes yes, yes, yes,
this no, votes no so the answer in simplistic terms is,
yes, you are going to most likely enjoy that movie
or that user is going to enjoy that movie.
So there we go, that's how the
restricted Boltzmann machine works.
I hope you enjoyed this breakdown of the training
and the application of the RBM
and I can't wait to see you in the next tutorial.
Until then, enjoy deep learning.